Document model and flow of metering data for billing (#79)
appuio/appuio-io-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/explanation/decisions/access-metering-data.adoc

= Access metering data to run reports

== Problem

As outlined in xref:appuio-cloud:ROOT:references/architecture/metering.adoc[Metering of resource usage], metering data is collected into an instance of Thanos (Prometheus API).
That data is supposed to be used to generate invoices.
It might also be used to show cost reports on the {portal}.

The Prometheus data is missing information.
For example prices and discounts.
This data has to be augmented using another source.

== Proposals

. Directly use the Prometheus API
+
The Prometheus API allows to get results for a single point in time.
It also allows to query all results within a given time range with a data point as defined by a given interval.

. Use of an intermediate storage
+

> The Prometheus data is queried regularly and stored into an intermediate storage.
> That intermediate storage could then also contain data about pricing and discounts.

Reviewer: I would mention in the problem section that we are solving a data warehousing problem where we have several "dimensions"
Also, there's no mentioning of any aggregation here. Right now it gives the impression that it just caches the prometheus raw results.
```suggestion
The Prometheus data is queried regularly, aggregated, enriched with product data and stored into an intermediate database.
That intermediate storage could then also contain data about pricing and discounts.
```

== Decision

Use of an intermediate storage

== Rationale

> Prometheus queries are restricted in how many data points can be processes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prometheus queries are restricted in how many data points can be processed.
```

> The queries required for our billing model are quite complex.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The queries required for the billing model are quite complex.
```

> It is not possible to run them once for a who billing interval (currently one month).

Reviewer: what is this sentence? :D
```suggestion
It's not possible to run them once for a who billing interval (currently one month).
```

Experiments have shown, that the query exceeds the maximum execution time.

> In addition, even with a fairly small data set, memory usage of the querier went up as high as 20GiB.

Reviewer: what's a querier for the unknowing user? Thanos wasn't mentioned here at all.
```suggestion
In addition, even with a fairly small data set, memory usage of the Thanos Querier went up as high as 20GiB.
```

Even if the query was run for smaller time ranges, the execution time was in the order of several seconds.
While this is not an issue for invoicing, it most certainly is for reports accessible to a user.

Simplifying those queries might be possible by using recording rules.

> xref:appuio-cloud:ROOT:references/quality-requirements/functional/invoicing-retention.adoc[Retention time for invoicing] outlines our need to change queries after the fact.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
xref:appuio-cloud:ROOT:references/quality-requirements/functional/invoicing-retention.adoc[Retention time for invoicing] outlines the need to change queries after the fact.
```
